And we're sitting out on the back porch of the new
house, John and Maridel Coldis. And I'm hoping
that this machine is working as it should.
See, October 21st, visiting with John Coldis. As a
beginner, would you summarize, make believe that
the person who might read or hear this would not
know your background before you came to A&M
University? Give us a brief biographical summary
of your experience before coming to A&M.
Okay.
Ready? Yeah. I'm originally from Gary, Indiana.
My dad came from Hungary. My mom's parents came
from Hungary. They eventually came to Gary,
Indiana because of the steel mills, and it
provided an opportunity for Europeans who
couldn't speak English
to get a job and to make a living. Grew up in Gary.
Went to the Gary, Indiana High School schools,
specifically the Wallace High School. Graduated
in 1940. I participated in athletics, football,
basketball, and baseball. I wanted to go to
college, couldn't afford to do so. Family
couldn't afford to send me. I went to work in the
steel mills to make some money. My high school
coaches told me that they would help and look
around and see if they could find an opportunity
for me to walk on someplace and maybe earn a
scholarship, an athletic
scholarship. Had the opportunity to go to
Arkansas State University, did so. Eventually,
after a month or so, got a full scholarship in
football. Played football, baseball for four
years, basketball one
year. Had a wonderful time at Arkansas State.
Majored in broad field science. in education, and
in history.
While I was in college, I participated in the ROTC
program, and so upon graduation from college, I
received a commission from the U.S. Army, Field
Artillery, and in August of 1953, My orders were to
report for two years of military service.
Fortunately, the Korean War ended in July of 1953,
and it was peacetime when I went in. I really wanted
to travel overseas. As it turned out, I was
stationed in Colorado Springs, Colorado, which
is a beautiful place. Enjoyed all of my time. I was
in the 4th Field Artillery Battalion, a 155 gun
outfit. It was an interesting period of time. Got
out of the service in 1955, started my teaching
career in junior high at Blytheville, Arkansas.
Had an opportunity to go to the University of
Toledo as a sports information person for my
former football coach, Frost England. I turned
the job down because I wanted to do some coaching
when I was younger. The interesting thing was that
the salaries were not too dissimilar at a
university and a junior high coaching job.
Coached for four years in Blytheville, Arkansas.
Enjoyed what I did. Two years in junior high, two
years in high school. I left Blytheville in 1959
and joined the staff of Bum Phillips out at
Amarillo High School, Amarillo Golden
Sandstone, and was the assistant football coach,
defensive backs, and was the head baseball coach
from 59 through 61. When I got out of the service, I
started my graduate work in the summer of 1956 at
the University of Arkansas. Under the old GI Bill,
you had seven years to use up everything you had
coming. And so I had planned to go back full-time in
61 to use all that up and get my doctoral degree by
63. What I decided early on as a child that I wanted
to teach, as I left the college campus, I thought
that I really wanted to get back and teach on the
college campus. So my orientation was in that
direction. Took my first college job, East Texas
State University, on the faculty there in 1963,
June 1 of 1963. Enjoyed my time. I was in the health
and physical education department at that time.
And Justin Hawthorne, head of the department,
super guy, took a very good period. At the time, Doe
Rollins, who had been dean of men at Texas A&M, was
the dean of men at East Texas State. And the
football coach was a man by the name of Coach Sykes,
who had coached Texas A&M. Those two used to tell me
a lot of stories about Texas A&M and came back to
make more sense years later when I came to A&M.
Taught for four years. We had a new president that
came in during that fourth year and he began to
reorganize the administrative staff of the
institution. And he was looking for a person who
had an excellent student orientation to serve as
the dean of students at that time. And he had gotten
good word about me from a number of people. So he
called me in one day, unbeknownst to me that he was
thinking about it. And I was the chairman of the
faculty committee on traffic safety and
security. And I assumed that's what we were going
to talk about. And he offered me the job as dean of
students. Now, that's when? 1967. And so Meridel
and I talked it over. The thing that we talked about
was that I was happy doing what I was doing. I always
wanted to be in the classroom. And I had never
thought about the administration, career
administration, straight line administration.
So we talked, and we decided to give it a couple of
years, and decided we would enjoy it, and we'd
stay. And if we didn't, we'd go back to full-time
teaching. As a part of that agreement, the
president at that time was Whit Halliday.
Part of that agreement was that I'd be allowed to
continue in the classroom. So he was agreeable to
that without any problem. And so I continued to
teach all that period of time. So I served as VP.
Well, they changed the title the next year from
Dean of Students to Vice President. I served with
under Dr. Whit Halliday for five of those years.
Worked with Bob McDowell, who was vice president
for finance. At the end of the fifth year, during
that year, Whit's wife committed suicide. And so
he decided to move. And Bob became president. And
so I served one year with Bob as vice president.
Hated to leave Bob. because he was a good man and
wanted to help him with his presidency.
The opportunities at Texas A&M, I thought, were
too great to pass up.
How did you and A&M come together? Who contacted
whom? We have an organization of student
personnel administrators in the state called
CUSPA. And Dean Hannigan and Howard Perry were
members of that group. And in fact, we had worked
closely together. I was the executive secretary
of that association. And the Southwest
Association as well, which took in four Southwest
states. And they told me that Dean Hannigan was
getting ready to retire. and they wondered if I
might not be interested in a job. I said, you know,
yeah. Of all these schools in the state of Texas
that would fit my orientation, I think A&M would be
as close as any. And so they just chatted with me
about that. And the next contact was by Dr.
Williams. He called me one afternoon and on the
telephone asked me if I might be interested in it.
And if so, if I would come and visit him. I'd never
met, to my knowledge, Jack Williams before that. I
had never visited with him in any way about
anything. So that was the contact. And that was
when? That was in the spring of... 1972. So
he had been here then a year? 1973. 1973. So he'd
been here two years plus because he came in the fall
of November 1 of 70. What was your impression of him
on first contact, first impressions? My first
visit down was an interesting one. His office, of
course, was in the building named after him, the
administration building. And Elder Rowell met me
and Dr. Williams had an appointment at the time and
he was running just a little bit late. So Nelda
introduced me to two young students who were
finishing up their degrees and they had me join
them for a cup of coffee. One was Kent Caperton and
the other was Roger Miller. And so I had coffee with
those two kids and they were super and we had a good
chat. All of a sudden Nelda said Dr. Williams was
ready and available We went in and we didn't talk
but a couple minutes and he shoveled me off to
Howard Perry and I was on my way for the day and so I
had lunch with the faculty and staff and students
and did a bunch of things around the campus and my
day was over and Howard
Perry asked me if there was anything else that I
would like to do and I said well Well, I had a talk
with Dr. Williams. I guess he was busy and you know,
I'd like to talk, chat with him about some concerns
that I had. And so Howard called over to Nelda and
Nelda said, oh yeah, his schedule is wide open. So
my thought was, he wasn't interested in me. And so
when I went by the office, I chatted with him a
little bit about those concerns, and I drove back
to Commerce that late afternoon, early evening.
And my thought was he was not interested, and so he
just had me down to visit, and that was it. Found out
later that he had made up his mind very quickly that
I was the one that he wanted for the job. And he
didn't need to talk to me anymore. But he was such a
bright man. I enjoyed the conversations
with him. He had a good sense of humor, most people
didn't know that.
When I first came back, He called me and had me come
by and he wanted to give me his assessment of all the
key administrative people on campus at that time.
And basically who he trusted and who he didn't and
who he liked and who he didn't like. And so that was,
you know, that was great for me to find out
immediately about all the people on campus. It was
an interesting discussion and conversation that
I will never forget. All right, now this first this
first visit, was that your only pre-offer visit?
What were your concerns as you came for that visit?
What were you wanting to learn? Well, I had been to
A&M a couple times in the past on recruiting
visits, recruiting staff. And so I was familiar
with the campus. I had talked to enough people over
the years and, of course, the fact that I went to the
University of Arkansas and A&M was a part of the
Southwest Conference, you know, I knew quite a bit
about A&M. Plus, in the service, summer camp, so my
contact and association with A&M had more depth to
it than, you know, just the first visit and coming
on campus to meet with Dr. Williams. I felt real
good about A&M. I felt real good about the
opportunities here. And when I say
opportunities, I think anybody that goes into
some kind of profession wants to be able to do a lot
of good things professionally. And for the most
part, just about anything that you go into, it
takes money. and East Texas State did not have the
financial resources. And when I said
opportunities, one, they really didn't have a
good student-like program at A&M at the time. So
the sky was the limit there. Plus, in regard to the
money, I thought a lot of money could be brought
into the program to develop a real first-class
program. Although I came afield, when I came into
the student personnel business. I learned very
quickly what in the world the profession was and
what it took and what it was all about. And I really
worked hard at learning. And in regard to a good
student life program, you need staff and you need
money and you need facilities. Did Dr. Williams
have any specific goals that he gave you? The most
important one to him at that time He had seen Dean
Hannigan as a good man, but a military man, and that
in regard to our student body, the voluntary Corps
of Cadet program, and the size of the student body
as it increased, using our terminology here, was
going to be mostly civilian and very small numbers
in the Corps of Cadets. And so he was concerned that
We'd take care of all the students. Secondly, and I
say secondly, equal to that was concern about
women and involving the women. And then, of
course, we just, all the institutions in the state
of Texas had not been integrated that far. And so he
had a concern also about the integration of the
minorities into A&M and into the student line
program. So those were his major. He was super as an
administrator in the sense that when he brought
you in to do a job, he didn't tell you all the things
he wanted you to do. He mentioned what his concerns
was. But it was yours to run with.
And so the period of time that I worked with him. He
would not agree to everything just because you
thought it was a good idea. And on numerous
occasions when I had meetings with him,
especially about major problems, we'd reach an
impasse. And he was very strong. He'd get very
strong. And on those occasions, I would just kind
of back off. And I'd wait until he was emotionally
back down to a good level, emotionally more
stable, before I'd approach that subject or
whatever again. In every case, he was always
agreeable to doing what I thought would be best for
the program. So as an administrator that worked
for him, he was the best that you could have. Let's
make believe someone had never seen Dr. Williams.
Describe him physically. He was about average
height.
I call it a square face. His body build was almost
that same way. Always
a smile.
Unless he was emotionally involved or serious
about something, he was relaxed and very
personable, casual.
I say square because he was, through the thoracic
region, was a broad-chested individual. He was a
well-built man. I never saw him in shorts. We
played golf together a lot, but he never wore
shorts on a golf course. But well-built
individual. What were his relaxing
activities? What did he do? One, he loved to play
golf. Most people didn't know that. It's
interesting that you would say relaxing. I'm not
sure it was that relaxing, but it took his mind off
of what he did day by day. Did you all play at the
university courts? No, oh no. We played down in
Brocker. He didn't want to play with him. There
were only
two other people that he played with, of which I'm
aware. One was General Simpson, and that was only
at the beginning when General Simpson went to work
for me. That kind of dropped off by the wayside. And
the other one was Bob Rucker, who ended up at
Grounds. You know, Bob was the what? Yeah, Grounds
Mains person. Yeah, headed that up. Bob had an
artificial left hand, but, you know, played well.
I played well for that handicap that he had. Dr.
Williams was a well-coordinated individual, but
he had started playing golf late in life. And the
funniest thing that if there was a tree within
hundred yards and it could be only two inches in
diameter, he'd find that tree. And I never did hear
him curse, but I heard words and sounds. But he
would slip out to the golf course and slip on back
in. He really didn't want to be seen by anybody. He
really didn't want to interact with anybody other
than with the group he was playing. And did he have
other activities that were getaway, relax? You
know, other than family and home, I can't think of
anything else. Because I don't know about fishing
or hunting or long vacations. He really lived his
job 24 hours a day. Did you become aware during your
years working with him that his Clemson
experience was of value here at A&M? Do you
remember any examples of that? Well, he had these
good friends from Clemson that
came to visit. that came as a staff member, I'm
trying to think of his, Hugh McCauley, Hugh and
Pinky McCauley.
We had, Meridel and I saw Hugh and Pinky on a trip to
Alaska, and Hugh was losing his eyesight, and
cannot see anymore, he's blind. But in regard to,
Clemson, I think, is a great deal like A&M. And I
think it's a very conservative institution,
conservative student body, conservative
faculty and staff for the most part. So I think that
all fit in to who Jack Williams was and was all
about. And when I say conservative,
I think probably When you say those terms, General
Rutter was conservative, but there are two
different types of conservative persons.
Jack Williams was conservative as it related to
finances and money. He wanted to save a penny. He
wanted to use whatever money he had to develop good
programs and programs that we needed within him
academically. He wanted to have an outstanding
faculty. He wanted to have an outstanding student
body. That meant increasing salaries, more
scholarships, and all of that. So he wasn't
conservative in the same way that General Rudder
was conservative, but philosophically
conservative.
He had a lot of things that he wanted to do that were
not supported by the Board of Regents. And he tried
to gain the confidence and the relationship with
the Board of Regents so he could implement more of
those things that he wanted to. For example, I know
he wanted the fraternities and sororities. He
thought they would be good for our campus because
they would involve more of the male and females
student activities of one type or another that
were not in the core of cadets and the board was not
interested back at that time. Did you and or he
bring that issue up in any way with board members?
He told me at the time that he would keep it in his
back pocket and hit the board when it was the right
time.
It never became full-blown early on And the
fraternities and sororities that were initiated
were initiated off campus without the
relationship with Texas A&M. Did you and Dr.
Williams ever discuss fraternities and
sororities? Oh, many, many times. I was very
supportive. I'm trying to think of the name of the
committee. Was it Target 2000? I think probably. I
think that probably was it. We had a committee. We
had a whole bunch of committees. and one related to
student life. And I know on that committee we had a
number of old legs, one of them being a Searcy Brace
one. And I remember I used to approach that group
all the time. That was back in the early 70s about
how important it was for us to have attorneys and
sororities recognized on our particular campus.
The one I told them, and Dr. Williams agreed, that
if they were going to be here, it would be better for
us to have a relationship with them than not have
any relationship at all. And I thought any student
organization could have a positive impact, both
upon the students and the campus, if you take that
orientation. And so those people, sort of seeing a
number of other people, The fact that they like Dr.
Williams and they like me, they listen to us in
terms of... There were a couple board members,
Julie Bell being one, and I'm not sure who else was
around. They were totally against it and opposed
to it. And then what happened was that got all
locked up in the
Melanie Zentgraf case. When the federal judge in
Houston ruled that the gay student services
organization was a social organization, and
since A&M did not recognize fraternities and
sororities, they didn't have to recognize the gay
student services organization. So it got tied up
in that, and so therefore the board was not about to
recognize it then. And then when it went to the
Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, and they reversed
that decision, then fraternities and
sororities, as well as the gay student services
organizations, were able to be recognized. Let's
hold that whole thing for a while.
commencement to attend as an A&M employee, I was
seated this close to her when she did not get her
hand shaken. With Bill Hobby right here, we were
shooting the breeze. All right, let's go back to
your early days. Who were the key people in the
student affairs area when you came?
The Tom Parsons was the Commandant of the Corps of
Cadets. And back at that time, the person that
served as head of the Army ROTC program by virtue of
that position, a military officer, was the
Commandant. Charles Powell was the Dean of Men.
Toby Reeves was the Dean of Women. Hal Poe was the
Director of Student Health Services. J. Wayne
Stark was the and director of Memorial Student
Center.
Bob Logan was the director of financial aid,
although Bob Logan did not work for me then,
financial aid reported the academic center. So
those were there. And they had all, pretty well all
of those were veterans, weren't they? Except for
maybe Toby. They'd been here a good while. And
y'all were, by and large, y'all were quartered
where? mostly in the YMCA
building. And, of course, the Student Center
people, you know, were over in the Student Center.
Back at that time, Wayne Stark
had student government and all the student
organizations and the Student Center Council, so
he was really key person for all student
organizations and I thought that was too much and
that we ought to separate it out. The programming
part of the MSC, I had done the same thing at East
Texas State when I took over there. After I got
involved with it, I thought it was, it would Two
separate programs in a whole lot of different
issues. I saw the student center as a programming
operation for the entire campus. Provide all
kinds of programs. I saw student government and
student organizations as being separate and
apart from that. Student government, of course,
for the student body to represent itself to me, the
president of the institution, and to the faculty.
and student activities, I thought there ought to
be a zillion organizations. One of the things that
I liked about the Corps is the fact that you operate
in small groups and you have this affiliation with
a few people. And if that's a good situation, then
you feel good about the larger unit. and
eventually to the university. And so as long as it
was legal and didn't cost us too much money, we
could support any new student organization. So
Carolyn Adair hired Carolyn in the summer of 74 to
be director of student activities. Now, she had
been working? On the MSC staff. So she was familiar
with that part of it. but worked for J. Wayne Stark.
Generalize about Wayne Stark. Describe him and
his efforts and so forth. Wayne
had a tremendous interest in young people, in
working with young people, in seeing young people
succeed and better themselves. do great things.
He was an interesting guy in the sense that he would
fight whomever, General Rutter and whoever else,
if he thought he was right and they were wrong in
regard to what he needed to do. We had a super
relationship because I respected who he was and
what he did. I had to be careful though because Dr.
Williams was not General Rudder.